Add dbt Wizard MCP and subagents docs (#9290)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-subagents.md

---
title: "Use subagents with dbt Wizard"
id: "wizard-subagents"
description: "Delegate work to specialized subagents in dbt Wizard, in the dbt platform or the CLI."
sidebar_label: "Use subagents"
tags: [AI, Wizard]
---

import WizardFeedbackCallout from '/snippets/_wizard-feedback-callout.md';

# Use subagents with <Constant name="wizard"/> <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

<IntroText>
Subagents let <Constant name="wizard" /> spin up focused, parallel agents to handle parts of a larger task &mdash; one to explore your project, one to make changes, one to review them. <Constant name="wizard"/> orchestrates them and consolidates the results back into your session.
</IntroText>

> Subagents run more work in parallel, which uses more tokens than a single-agent session handling the same task. Spawn them when a task genuinely benefits from division of labor.

Reviewer: I'm not clear when I start a task how I'd know if my task if large enough or know when I'd use subagents.

<Constant name="wizard" /> enables you to define custom agents, set display nicknames, and define global limits through the `config.toml` file. The following sections call out which steps are CLI-specific.

## How subagents work

<Constant name="wizard"/> handles orchestration for you &mdash; spawning agents (starting up a new helper agent to work on a task), routing work to them, waiting for results, and consolidating their output. Subagents are spawned only when you explicitly ask for them or when a task you describe maps onto a configured agent.

For example, prompt <Constant name="wizard"/>:

```
Review PR #123. Use one agent to map what changed, one to check tests
and downstream impact, and one to look up the relevant dbt docs.
```

<Constant name="wizard"/> spawns the agents, lets them work in parallel, and brings their findings back into one response.

## Built-in agents

<Constant name="wizard"/> ships with built-in agents that it can spawn without any configuration. Several are purpose-built for dbt work:

<SimpleTable>

| Agent | What it's for |
|-------|--------------|

> | `explorer` | Answers specific, well-scoped questions about your project. Fast and read-only — spawn several in parallel for independent questions. |

Reviewer: What do you think about adding a column with an example of how you'd call each agent?

> | `explorer` | Answers specific, well-scoped questions about your project. Fast and read-only — spawn several in parallel for independent questions. |

Reviewer: Also "what's it for" descriptions aren't parallel. Not a huge deal but would make them more glanceable. I'll make suggestions!

> | `worker` | Execution and production work: implementing part of a feature, fixing tests or bugs, or splitting a large refactor into independent chunks. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `worker` | Performs execution and production work, such as, implementing part of a feature, fixing tests or bugs, or splitting a large refactor into independent chunks. |
```

> | `validation` | A dbt validation specialist. After model edits, runs structured validation — SQL check, `dbt run` with `--defer`, prod vs. dev comparison, and impact analysis — to validate changes before you merge. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `validation` | Provides dbt validation. After model edits, runs structured validation — SQL check, `dbt run` with `--defer`, prod vs. dev comparison, and impact analysis — to validate changes before you merge. |
```

> | `test_writer` | A dbt test coverage specialist. Analyzes project metadata and warehouse data to find coverage gaps, validates assumptions with queries, and writes `schema.yml` tests for models with low or no coverage. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `test_writer` | Tests dbt coverage. Analyzes project metadata and warehouse data to find coverage gaps, validates assumptions with queries, and writes `schema.yml` tests for models with low or no coverage. |
```

</SimpleTable>

> You don't need to declare these &mdash; <Constant name="wizard"/> routes to them automatically when a task fits, or you can ask for one by name (for example, "use `test_writer` to add tests to `stg_customers`"). To add your own roles, refer to [Custom agents](#custom-agents-cli).

Reviewer: I like this example! In the table, you could use the other path of just asking a question that would automatically leverage each agent.

## Manage subagents

Use slash commands inside an interactive session to inspect and steer agent threads:

<SimpleTable>

| Command | What it does |
|---------|-------------|

> | `/agent` | Switch the active agent thread to inspect or steer ongoing work. |

Reviewer: These also would benefit from an example column. I'm also not sure I understand the difference between agents/subagents

| `/subagents` | View and switch between running subagent threads. |

</SimpleTable>

> You can also tell <Constant name="wizard"/> in plain language to steer, stop, or close an agent thread. For the full list of session commands, refer to the [slash command reference](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-slash-commands).

Reviewer: Super helpful! I don't see `/agent` in the wizard slash commands.

Author: oh it should be [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-slash-commands?version=2.0&name=Fusion#long-running-tasks) or [here](https://arc.net/l/quote/itdukxoe)

<img width="1334" height="473" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-03 at 09 20 35" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f0c0a827-69c9-42fe-b2a8-e65300e2a9be" />

Author: do you not see it?

## Approvals and sandbox

Subagents inherit the parent session's [approval and sandbox policy](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-how-it-works#approval-and-sandboxing). Any runtime overrides you set for a turn (permissions, sandbox mode) apply to the agents it spawns. Approval requests from a subagent surface in your session labeled with their source, so you know which agent is asking.

A custom agent can override sandbox settings for itself &mdash; useful when, for example, an exploration agent should stay read-only while a build agent needs workspace write access.

## Custom agents (CLI) {#custom-agents}

> Beyond the built-in behavior, you can define custom agent _roles_ in `~/.dbt/wizard/config.toml`. Each role is a reusable agent &mdash; a reviewer, an explorer, a debugger &mdash; that <Constant name="wizard"/> can spawn by name.

Reviewer: Why would you create a custom agent? Is it if you have a new agent you want to call? Or can the new role only be reviewer/explorer/debugger?

> A role is declared as a `[agents.ROLE_NAME]` table. The role name is the key (for example, `[agents.reviewer]`), and the table supports these fields:

Reviewer: This paragraph might make more sense as oart of the following table. I had to look at the example to understand that `agents.ROLE_NAME` goes into the .toml file

<SimpleTable>

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `description` | Yes* | When to use the role. <Constant name="wizard"/> reads this to decide which role fits a task. *Required unless supplied by the referenced `config_file`. |
| `config_file` | No | Path to a role-specific config layer (a `.toml` file). Relative paths resolve against the `config.toml` that defines the role. This is where you set the role's model, instructions, sandbox, and MCP servers. |
| `nickname_candidates` | No | Readable display labels for spawned instances of this role. |

</SimpleTable>

> The role's behavior — its AI model, `developer_instructions`, sandbox mode, and `mcp_servers` — lives in the file referenced by `config_file`. That file is an ordinary [`config.toml`](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-config#configtoml) layer, so it accepts the same keys as your main config. Anything you don't set there inherits from the parent session.

Reviewer: > The role's behavior
Is this referring to the new custom role you're creating?

> by `config_file`. That file is an ordinary [`config.toml`]
Is the `config_file` the same as config.toml?

### Display nicknames

> When several instances of the same role run at once, `nickname_candidates` give each a readable label in the UI (for example, `Scout`, `Ranger`). Nicknames are cosmetic &mdash; <Constant name="wizard"/> identifies a role by its `[agents.ROLE_NAME]` key, not the nickname shown.

Reviewer: > Nicknames are cosmetic
You mean they're fun??!? :)

Author: maybe i should say they're for show or display only -

> When several instances of the same role run at once, `nickname_candidates` give each a readable label in the UI (for example, `Scout`, `Ranger`). Nicknames are cosmetic &mdash; <Constant name="wizard"/> identifies a role by its `[agents.ROLE_NAME]` key, not the nickname shown.

Author: ```suggestion
When several instances of the same role run at once, `nickname_candidates` give each a readable label in the UI (for example, `Scout`, `Ranger`). Nicknames are display-only &mdash; <Constant name="wizard"/> identifies a role by its `[agents.ROLE_NAME]` key, not the nickname shown.
```

</SimpleTable>

You can also tell <Constant name="wizard"/> in plain language to steer, stop, or close an agent thread. For the full list of session commands, refer to the [slash command reference](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-slash-commands).

## Approvals and sandbox

Subagents inherit the parent session's [approval and sandbox policy](/docs/dbt-ai/wizard-how-it-works#approval-and-sandboxing). Any runtime overrides you set for a turn (permissions, sandbox mode) apply to the agents it spawns. Approval requests from a subagent surface in your session labeled with their source, so you know which agent is asking.

A custom agent can override sandbox settings for itself &mdash; useful when, for example, an exploration agent should stay read-only while a build agent needs workspace write access.

## Custom agents (CLI) {#custom-agents}

You can define custom agent _roles_ in `~/.dbt/wizard/config.toml`. 

A custom agent role is a reusable role for a particular type of work you want to perform, like reviewing code, exploring a project, or debugging something. You can create any role name that fits your workflow, it doens't have to be one of the built-in roles. 

Each role has two parts:

> 

Author: added another table and clarified per leona's feedback
